the experience of pleasure is incredibly
expansive it's so big that it's hard to
exist inside of it I know that's such a
weird way to say it but the felt sense
that's exactly what's happening your
solid boundary starts
dissolving today we're going to talk
about something that a lot of us spend a
lot of Our Lives chasing and also in
many subtle ways throughout our lives we
we push it away cuz it's really intense
and and that is pleasure
I'm looking forward to this one this is
good yeah yeah what what makes pleasure
interesting to talk about I remember
early on in my journey I was reading
titn Han and titn Han was talking about
doing the dishes and how pleasurable
doing the dishes was and I hated doing
the dishes I like it was like the you
know everybody has that one chore you
don't want to do I have maybe several
chores I don't want to do
with one of them
uh one of them was doing the dishes and
he described this thing as like oh it's
warm water it's soapy it's like this
really enjoyable experience and so I
went and did the dishes that way and I
was like oh wow this is incredibly
pleasurable if I allow it to be and then
I kind of realized well that that's all
of life is incredibly pleasurable if I
allow it to be and so I started
experimenting with
pleasure a lot and and I have Contin to
learn a tremendous amount about pleasure
through the years like even last year NE
next year I assume I'm going to learn a
lot about it but I remember just
experimenting saying how much pleasure
can I extract from life and the amazing
thing about it was that it wasn't what I
thought it was going to be right I
thought it was going to be like having
sex all the time or something right like
I would be chasing pleasure like I'd be
doing heroin or something like that but
if you're really chasing
pleasure it can't be something that you
get when you do X Y and Z because you
can't do X Y and Z all the time if
you're really chasing pleasure it has to
be able to be extracted from any given
moment any moment there it's like oh
where's the pleasure in this moment and
so that's what ended up happening it was
just like oh how do I take pleasure in
this breath how do I take pleasure in
doing the dishes how do I take pleasure
in this walk and when I did this for I
did this for several weeks and when I
did this what happened was I just
started feeling
safer like that kind of constant
tracking that constant anxiety
that funny feeling in the back of my
head that something's wrong just
started dissipating and you know there's
all sorts of studies that show that you
know we learn faster if we're not
anxious that we you know I know for a
fact that like if people are anxiously
attached that they're pushing people
away and if you're not anxious and
you're just like open to it connection
and attachment like more of it comes a
better quality of it comes so there's
all sorts of benefits that come with
with having a nervous system that feels
very much in tuned and and not anxious
for the next attack and that really
comes from pleasure because pleasure is
really if you're if you're relaxed it's
an incredibly pleasurable State we've
all had that moment being on the
beach sitting back sunshiny in that Soft
Wind is going through you're like ah and
you just feel that like gentle pleasure
in life and that's something that tells
us oh H everything is good and so if you
cultivate that
pleasure like Life Starts becoming more
and more everything is good yeah and
some something that's really interesting
to me about what you just said is this
might even be you know sort of a
definition of pleasure in in this in
some sense which is that you went from a
place of thinking that it was something
you had to get to something that you
would notice in any moment so there was
something less active and more receptive
in it or something less graspy or like
outcome based like towards feeling a
certain way and more towards recognizing
what's there and I'm curious to what
extent it's actually
that uh that change that is that like
creates the safety in the
system and increases as a result the
experience of pleasure yeah I I I I
can't tell you what like what's the
chicken and what's the egg it's a great
question I think the but what I can say
is the definition for pleasure that I
that I like the most was loan's pleasure
which I'm going to Loosely say here
which was noticing the sensations in
your body moving noticing the movement
of the sensations in your body and it
and that's what it is like it is just
not like everybody right now who's
listening to this
podcast can feel the sensations in your
body maybe it's like the way your ears
are hearing this sound that's coming
through the podcast or the way your
breath is moving in and out of your nose
or just you know the feelings in in your
internal world having movement inside
the body having
movement that's that's
pleasure and and it's like it's no more
complicated than that it's just that and
so I don't know if
it's you know the noticing of that that
creates the safety or if it's the actual
experience of pleasure that creates the
safety but all I know is that there's
just a tremendous amount of safety and
and trust and faith like all those
things seem to come with the experience
of pleasure yeah what what I really love
about that is you know the the loan's
definition of you know pleasure being
the the noticing of the sensations
moving in the body there's not a
veilance or a like positive or negative
associated with any of those
Sensations and so there's something that
like meditators might be familiar with
as like
awareness actual feeling and equinity
but not equinity in it doesn't matter
way but equinity and they like oh this
is enjoyable the whatever is happening
for right now can feel good and I don't
need to go out there and do anything to
make that happen it just can be here
with me yeah that's right that's right
there's there it is not managing the
sensations of your
body it's pleasure it's noticing the
sensations of your body that creates
pleasure and that's and it's it's like
this incredibly simple thing and I
remember like
after like noticing the for the first
time um when titn Han had you know
written somewhere about doing the dishes
and how enjoyable doing the dishes how
much pleasure you could have in doing
the dishes and I did it I remember
thinking whoa whoa wait wait whoa whoa
whoa whoa
whoa I this all the time I can have this
all the time I can have this in my
breath I can have this in the way that I
move I can have pleasure all the time
and that one blew me away especially
because shortly thereafter I forgot all
about it and it was like a month later
I'm like wait a second what what the
[__] just happened like a month ago I
realized that I could be in pleasure all
the time and now it's a month later and
I did it like once like what what what
was that you know and that was an
amazing thing to because when you really
grock it you're like oh this is
available all the time and so now
there's no need to chase it it's just
always
here and yet somehow you know that what
happened in my journey was somehow I was
like why am I avoiding this because it's
the only option it's the only option you
you're avoiding it once you realize you
can have it anytime it's an avoidance
yeah so what what makes people avoid it
and and I'm I'm noticing that for you
there was a a Time prior to this
recognition that you didn't even you
weren't aware that there was pleasure
available on some level maybe you were
but you're consciously you weren't and
I'm curious of two things one how does
that happen to us is that socially
conditioned is that family conditioned
or is it just something we might
eventually develop a deeper capacity for
than we had previously and then the
second question is once you had the
recognition what what makes the
avoidance come back what what would make
it be avoided what has people avoid
feeling pleasure yeah I think pleasure a
lot like Joy it's if you're not feeling
all this if you have a lot of stuck
emotions then then that's where your
situation goes like it you know your
body is mind
State personhood is trying to get back
to equilibrium and if you have a whole
bunch of stuck emotions
then it's very hard for the body to do
anything besides like try to process and
get through those emotions and if you're
not feeling the emotions if you're not
allowing those emotions to move then
you're like kind trapped in these cycles
of constant self-abuse or shame or guilt
or whatever judgment all the time and
and so I think that's that's part of it
it's why we don't experience the
pleasure right and it's also somewhat
why we fall back because what I've
noticed is the more that I have
emotional fluidity the more the pleasure
just seems to be the natural state of
things there's just more enjoyment and
pleasure joy that whole thing and so I
think that's part of it also it's really
intense you know yesterday we were doing
uh the people in the year program I did
a a rapid coaching with some folks and
there was multiple people that you know
they're they're like long enough in the
program now where they're starting to
feel like this tremendous joy and it's
scary and there's nobody I know who
started hitting that like joy and
pleasure peace they're they are distinct
but where they don't get scared you know
the experience of pleasure is incredibly
expansive it's
like and and when it's so big that it's
hard to exist inside of it that's I I I
know that's such a weird way to say it
but it the felt sense that's exactly
what's happening like if you allow
pleasure in in this very deep way it is
so expansive it's like
your perimeter your who you are like
your solid boundary starts dissolving
beyond the reach of the government in
the mind of the self right exactly and
it just and so that's very scary because
it's like well where am I going and how
big is this and yeah somebody said
yesterday while they were working
through this they were saying it feels
like I'm falling and I said oh you know
it never ends what and I was like what
do you call falling that never ends and
she was like flying being held like she
had all these different words that would
and but but what happens is it just
feels like falling until you you know
until you get used to it and so that's
it's actually part of the reason why
embracing intensity is so important for
this work it's not the intensity of only
the intensity of let's say pain or anger
or sadness it's the intensity of
pleasure which I find to be far more
intense than than the uh you know the
intensity of Joy the intensity of Peace
can be far more intense than the
intensity of Rage or and you lose
control in it you you know you you lose
lose yourself in it to some degree and
that's very scary for people I mean ask
any person who's had like trouble having
an orgasm you know like sexual orgasm
like you we've all met someone who's
like I can't do it unless everything is
just right and I feel like I lose
control etc etc like this is it's a very
similar thing that happens except for
the orgasm is just life itself yeah and
something I noticed here is that a a
common misconception or maybe just a a
conception no one's definitions wrong is
like pleasure being something distinct
from sadness anger other emotions and in
in this this definition we've been using
it is actually all of those emotions
being noticed experienced and allowed to
move and not managed and so I think one
one of the things that you're pointing
to here is that pleasure when allowed
will also if you have other stuck
emotions other stuff that you haven't
been feeling that will come up with it
because
to be in the state of non-managed
pleasure is to allow all that is there
to move and you know this is why if
we're if we're going to talk about an
orgasm sometimes a really big orgasm
will leave somebody feeling a lot of
emotions they'll be like screaming but
suddenly there maybe a little anger in
it or maybe like cry after so I it seems
like the movement or the really rather
the experience of pleasure involves the
movement of whatever is there and with
that can come a lot of what we don't of
of what we're traditionally used to
managing and so in managing that we're
managing away the pleasure that comes
with it yeah agreed I think you know
something like love does that a little
bit more like if we really start loving
ourselves that like that emotional
fluidity comes a little bit more than
pleasure but but it absolutely comes it
act it absolutely allows the space for
that to happen and absolutely man there
is so much pleasure to be had in getting
angry there's so much pleasure to be had
in in in being scared there's so much
pleasure to be had in being sad and and
and grieving and and it really changes
the way that like all those Sensations
happen if you're enjoying them and and
and taking like deep pleasure in anger
or sadness or fear there's just a like
oh wow this is amazing and it just
changes everything in it so yeah I
totally agree and I think it's really
important to note that pleasure there's
no moment when Sensations aren't moving
through your body so there's no moment
you don't you can't notice them and and
therefore there's no moment where
pleasure isn't available yeah that puts
an interesting lens on some of the work
that we do as well where you know an
anger release or any kind of emotional
release that we do it's a lot of it
designed so that you can have the
experience without creating shame or
guilt or self- judgment and maybe even
noticing where that's happening and
seeing that it's not necessary also that
you get to experience the pleasure in
the emotion the pleasure that's always
been available in it and as that as your
system learns that then the emotions
become more fluid yes that's right
that's a that's exactly how it works
yeah um you know it's funny though
because when we when we're doing the
emotional releases we usually don't say
okay everybody take pleasure in the
anger right but instead it seems like it
works a little bit better it's like get
angry get really angry and then
eventually they notice the pleasure in
it like right now like as you've seen in
Master Class there's all these pictures
of people after their anger released
taking pictures of the way the world
looks right and how they feel and like
their smiles and their contentment after
moving anger and it's like if you see
those pictures it's like they all
represent pleasure and but but it's it's
interesting in the emotional releases
what I find is that it's important to
just go all the way towards the
emotional release without shame and then
in that the pleasure is found rather
than to say
do the do the anger release with
pleasure so it's an interesting you know
it's it's more of a discovery it works
better if people use it as a discovery
because what I notice is people say I
need to do anger with pleasure their
whole system gets confused and and then
they like find ways to bow out of the
anger yeah and I think that kind of
uncovers just a common limiting belief
in in that avoidance which is that this
can't be pleasurable or that can't be
pleasurable right and you know we're
going to have that belief until we until
we collect enough evidence that that's
not the case yeah but that that points
to where this pattern might come from
where like where would we develop a
belief that certain emotions that we
feel can't be pleasurable and that if
we're feeling it we need to feel shame
or judge ourselves or you know not be
seen protect ourselves from from it
being seen yeah I mean that if if we're
punished as kids you know obviously if
we're punished for an emotion or
rejected for an emotion or love is
removed because we're having an emotion
that's going to to to take away the
pleasure of that experience and and the
amazing thing I there are definitely
things like I'm pretty confident if I
was physically tortured I wouldn't be
able to take pleasure in it though I
know there's definitely people who take
pleasure in BDSM or something so I know
that there's even some capacity there
but what what as we're talking about it
one of the things I noticed is that I
don't want like pleasure to become a
morality or like you know a lot of
people when they listen to this they
might take things into an extreme and
say oh oh I I have to feel pleasure all
the time or um really like you couldn't
take pleasure in X why nuclear bomb goes
off there's no pleasure in that um and
so I would just say to anybody listening
like let go of the extremes and just see
how like deep the rabit Abit hole goes
you know what I mean like just take some
moments here and there and see oh can I
find pleasure in this can I find
pleasure in this by noticing the
sensations moving I think I just note
that because I think it's really
important that it doesn't become like I
am supposed to feel pleasure Because by
the way that'll Chase all the pleasure
right out of the out of the situation uh
that you're in and as far as your
question goes
absolutely if we are told that we are
bad for something and as kids we think
we're bad because love is removed we
think we're bad because we don't get
attention we think we're bad because we
get punished we get shamed there's lots
of things that make us think that we're
bad those are the places where pleasure
is going to be hard to find in those
areas in particular and enough of that
pleasure is just going to be hard to
find generally even though it's
happening always yeah one thing that I I
noticed there is that it doesn't have to
be it can be but it doesn't have to be
that
the pleasure itself is the thing that's
not allowed if anger is not allowed then
pleasure is diminished then you still
have that you still develop that the
limiting belief well if anger is going
to get me attacked if my anger's not
okay then I can't feel that so there's
some Sensation that could be moving in
my body that I could enjoy but I now
decide I can't and so pleasure is
limited by other emotions being Lim
limited so so a parent out here could be
like well nobody would ever shame their
kids for having pleasure though that
does sometimes happen but that doesn't
even have to be the thing that's
happening for pleasure to be dimin
diminished correct that's yeah that's a
beautiful pointer and yes I mean
obviously there are some parents who
like any kind of sexual pleasure they're
going to they're going to chastise or
guilt the kid you know masturbation or
whatever that's all going to happen um
but if you just think about like you're
having dinner with a seven-year-old and
the seven-year-old just starts finding
like a tremendous amount of pleasure in
eating the food oh my God Mom this is so
good oh oh my God these french fries
they're so oh oh oh the salt on these
French Fri like you can just I I don't
know too many parents who wouldn't start
getting annoyed you know like like we're
at the Denny's relax kid um I mean this
this reminds me of just any you some
meals with Tara exactly yeah I was about
to say it so perfect example so we're
out we're out with Tara um so my
daughter and her boyfriend uh are going
to meet us for dinner it's like the
first time and I order these bacon
wrapped goat cheese dates or something I
don't like goat cheese uh the kids did
not like these things and so they were
sitting on the table and Tara arrived
and she started eating them and she
started doing that which is how Tera
eats she's like oh the oh these are and
we're in like a kind of fancy restaurant
you know first meeting and like she's
like making like all this noise and the
new boyfriend leans over to Esme and
goes now I know why I can't embarrass
you right which is like natural for us
to go oh that level of pleasure in
public is
embarrassing and so it is it is not
something that like is like societally
acceptable like you oddly like we we
might even be more comfortable if we
were walking down the side of the road
and there's a homeless person who's
yelling God damn it the government's in
my head as compared to like a homeless
person like laying down ring in pleasure
like like which one's going to make us
more uncomfortable or maybe even equally
uncomfortable so it is an interesting
thing just how how much pleasure can be
and and I see it all the time like we do
you know we'll do angry releases and
when we do um some of our live work
it'll be like okay here's the anger
release and then we'll often do pleasure
right after that and you'll see people
do anger for 45 50 minutes like and then
we're like okay pleasure and like well
they'll get into and five minutes later
everybody has to be reminded like hey
wait we're still doing pleasure play
wrot more pleasure like it's like it's a
it's actually harder for people to
maintain the exist like feeling pleasure
in their system yeah something that's
interesting about the the example you
just gave of you know the the person on
the street like with in anger or the one
writhing in pleasure or terara your wife
or the kid at the table somebody who's
just like in deep grief the the thought
that might occur to somebody who's
uncomfortable with that scenario is wow
this person's out of control yeah that's
that's what's actually happening you're
actually allowing the food to fully hit
you in instead of controlling the hit
you're letting life like that's the an
interesting way to think about pleasure
is like pleasure is like letting life
fully hit you it's a very alive feeling
it's you know it's like and and when you
let it fully hit you like it it kind of
there's a sensation of it taking over
but the interesting thing is it's such a
powerful tool if you like it changes you
know we have a lot of people do
gratitude practices and like
you're there now there's like people on
Twitter and all talking about how these
gratitude practices are changing their
lives and and how the way we do it is
slightly differently than a lot of
gratitude practices that it's not just a
head thing it's a full body sport it's a
it's a sematic experience it's and part
of the reason that it's so powerful is
because of the pleasure that happens in
those moments and it and it's also if
you just do a pleasure exercise for 10
minutes a day it also really it can
really change your experience really
quickly which is the amazing thing um
the the important part if you're doing
that exercise however is that like
pleasure can't become a goal or
something you're supposed to do or have
to do it's it's like it it's more of a
like a noticing or a receiving or a
getting to do because it's just a lot
less pleasurable if pleasurable at all
if it becomes a have to or a should or a
trying or anything like that yeah and
that that's something you see and
there's there's a lot of practices you
know there's like Tantra for example
there's a way that Tantra can be
something people experience as like um
allowing the pleasure and there's also
some people some ways that people can
get on that path and they're like oh
pleasure is the goal this is the thing
this is the this is what I will now
conspicuously uh uh demonstrate to show
my progress and so not to be not to call
out any any Tantra people here CU that's
just an example and it can happen in our
work too and does happen in artw work
yeah yeah and even with any emotion you
can have like a conspicuous oh you know
what my anger's okay I'm going to let my
anger be okay but like kind of actually
doing that to avoid really feeling
something and so I'm curious about like
the the pitfalls here if someone were to
take this this message and be like oh
yeah you know what my pleasure
is my pleasure is lovely my pleasure is
wonderful what are what are some of the
ways that that might end up getting
steered in a direction of
avoidance uh uh subtly yeah yeah so if
it becomes something that you start
reaching for that's pretty much the
easiest way like if it's something that
you're like oh yeah I get to feel
pleasure now great as compared to okay
I'm reaching for I'm defining Myself by
I'm like if there's any kind of hunger
in getting the
pleasure then that usually is a clear
sign that it's become either avoidant or
or you're pushing the pleasure away
which is kind of avoidance also kind of
pushes the pleasure away like you might
get like the bodily sensation of
pleasure a little bit but you're not
getting the that felt sense of safety
that comes with pleasure because it has
to be
chased right so that it's not safe if
you have to go find it right safety is
like oh that this is the way it is that
that's what creates the safety not like
oh if I once I do this then I'll get you
know that that is that is the anxiety
and so I think that's the biggest that's
the biggest tell is that is
just if you're chasing it um and the
other place that I would just be a
little bit I'd be really a little bit
careful is if it's if like there's a way
that you can do pleasure where it's it's
like it detracts from the other
emotional experiences instead of
amplifies the other emotional
experiences and that's another way that
you can see that there's some avoidance
going on or that pleasure is not being
used as a way to feel more alive it's
being used as a way to avoid the full
aliveness of your full emotional
experience as an example it's like if
someone's like getting angry at their
mom and they're like okay I'm going to
go to pleasure to to like not have the
anger and rather than oh I'm feeling
anger at my mom oh this is a pleasurable
experience this is oh cool like yeah
look at that like yeah I have a
boundary yeah oh I'm going to draw this
boundary and it's going to like send
these like shock waves of fear that my
mom might abandon me let's see how that
feels that could be really pleasurable
like then that's a different deal yeah
just just following along with that
emotional Journey you just carved out or
you just laid out I my system went from
the like angry at my mom and not all
like something's bad about it and I'm
like leaving myself and in her which
leads more likely to be an attack to oh
yeah my I get to have a boundary and
then like I I experiened that as coming
back into my body and from that
place is less about the other person and
more about what I need Which is far less
likely to result in me taking a
defensive action that's received as
attack yeah I've never thought about it
that way that's yeah it's that's exactly
right yeah when we talk about like
asking for your wants you can do it in a
way that's going to be more likely to be
attacked and if you know drawing a
boundary there's a way of doing it
that's more likely to be attacked and
there's even getting scared there's a
way that you're more likely going to get
attacked and I and it it's an
interesting thing right if you're
actually having pleasure in it then
you're in your body and then you're not
trying to manage the result of it and
therefore less likely to be attacked
yeah I think there's a distinction there
between the pleasure and like some kind
of ego gratification because you know
somebody could be like sadistically
enjoying being angry and that's
different from the definition of the
noticing of Sensations moving in the
body I have a a relative
who every time they shop and buy
something expensive they get this kind
of
like look at what I bought and it looks
like pleasure but it's really shame
like you like if you feel their system
they've cut off the way their gut feels
and so it's like it is like the pleasure
of like eating something that you're not
supposed to eat that tastes really good
but you know it's going to make you feel
like [__] in a like in 10 20 30 40 50
minutes it's it's like it's like what I
think what would be called like a guilty
pleasure right it's
like that's not the pleasure I'm talking
talking
about like the and that's the
interesting thing if you really feel
your life with the pleasure of just
breathing and the pleasure of just being
in your body the pleasure of just you
know doing the dishes then the guilty
pleasures
become okay yeah great I bought this
thing but I could do the
dishes yeah you
know yeah I can have the lamb or I could
just like breathe deeply and feel better
than most people who have a Lamborghini
so that's an interesting so actually
what happens if you're feeling the real
pleasure of just
aliveness then these guilty pleasures
become right and the guilty pleasure is
like it's like having the pleasure of
something but it's also like putting
shame next to the pleasure and I think
that generally that's that happens
naturally and I don't as we I would like
to actually unpack this and think about
this for a minute because you know
there's a tremendous amount of people
who get taught that pleasure is
shameful so you they're shame put on sex
they're shame put on like shot buying
something good for yourself there like
all these ways in which like we get
shamed for having pleasure and I and my
experience of this and I haven't thought
this through entirely um but my
experience of this is that that pleasure
is feeling you feel like this very deep
aliveness it's
very expansive it's
very you lose yourself and that scares
people and so they need to like put
shame in with it and so it's not unlike
we have this story that I've told many
times about if there's a kid crying on a
plane I can stand up look at everybody
on the plane I can tell you who wasn't
allowed to cry as a kid right because
crying overwhelmed their parents and so
they were shamed in the crying well
pleasure is you know far
more a loss of self than
crying and so I think a lot of people go
o and then they throw the shame in and
and interestingly yesterday I was
working with somebody on exactly this
issue it was they were using shame as a
way
to to not see that their life was great
and and that story is wonderful It's a
Wonderful story so this person was
telling me how ashamed they were of the
fact that they had this golden
opportunity
job this wonderful job a head of product
for this company and they got involved
in a woman and they kind of let the job
slide and they got fired and they're
like this is you know just like they
were just so ashamed and like beating
thems up for this thing and I was
talking to them I was like okay so like
let me just understand so after you got
fired you started your own app that's
now making $150,000 a week why are you
not [__] stoked that you got
fired how is that not the best choice
that you ever made like how is it that
you're beating yourself up for the thing
that allows you to be independent and
financially like what the right and like
and and in that
noticing and oh so that all the Shan was
doing was preventing him from feeling
how good life was CU as soon as he saw
that he started laughing and smiling and
it like that and it just shows that the
shame was all designed to stop that
emotional experience from happening of
feeling alive and and the pleasure of
what had happened and that I just by the
way that is with every somebody be like
there's no way that I would ever feel
[__] everybody does everybody beats
themelves up for something that if they
like draw the line out of into the
future has made something great in their
life happen today right every single
person is like ah I shouldn't have done
this thing three years ago I feel shame
for the thing three years ago but if
they look at their life right now they
can say oh that [__] wouldn't have
happened if it wasn't for that but they
still feel ashamed of the thing from
three years ago it's an amazing thing
yeah something that's been kind of
bubbling up for me now has been how it
seems that the pleasures that we won't
allow ourselves become the things that
we actually become fixated on correct
and like for example you were talking
about the lamb Lamborghini earlier and
you know you might talk about like
seeing seeing a a beautiful member of
the opposite sex or same sex whatever
you're attracted to who is not your
partner and you have a commitment and
agreements and you're like I'm not
allowed to be attracted to that person
or you can be like oh yeah I can
absolutely just let myself speed run
that entire path of what would it be
like if I followed that pleasure what
would be like if I got the Lamborghini
and I'm like okay cool I got the
Lamborghini I could have actually gotten
this pleasure from the dishes and if the
pleasure is available either way then it
just Stills down to what do I actually
want and and the the long-termism in
that can be can be present with me like
what do I really deeply want not just
what's going to gratify a thing that I
haven't been allowing myself to even
feel in a simulated way or that I
wouldn't allow myself and so some part
of me is always fixated on going there
like that's why a lot I think a lot of
times people take pleasure or what kind
of what we've been talking about like
ooh kind of pleasure in any kind of
boundary breaking uh experience for
themselves any any anywhere they
wouldn't let themselves go they're kind
of fixated on and that's that's an
interesting phenomenon for us to have to
be drawn towards what we won't allow
ourselves almost as though there's just
this intelligence in us that wants us to
expand until we would allow ourselves
whatever is best for us and then only
then could we know that we're on a path
that is actually right for us and stay
connected with ourselves in it yeah so I
think this is the thing that scares
people about pleasure I've had this with
um a couple clients where what happens
is they're like I'm scared to allow
myself to feel pleasure because then I
am going to like cheat on my husband
then I am going to like buy the car that
I want I've always wanted but that would
be financially irresponsible for me to
buy then I'm going to then I'm going
like I'm going to be this evil thing if
I actually allow myself to feel pleasure
because then I'm going to you know go
after all these pleasurable things and a
that's not how it
works it's exactly we do those things
because we disallow them because we're
like because they become kinky because
they become shameful because and we're
addicted to that
cycle but also it doesn't actually
require you to do the things meaning
just it's just like so you feel sexually
aroused towards somebody who's not your
partner and they're walking down the
street you feel sexually aroused for
them most of us will just stop that
sexual arousal oh no I'm not allowed to
feel that and they'll stop it you can
just feel it yeah look that I'm totally
feeling it and and you'll just notice
like everybody can try this fully feel
it don't it's it's not a fantasize so
it's not you're fantasizing over what's
going to happen next and I'm going to CH
that's a different thing but you're just
going to fully feel that sexual arousal
in the
moment and then like you'll notice
you're not fixated on it anymore it just
like comes and it goes it's it's
literally when we feel that arousal and
we cut
it that the fixation starts happening
like oh no I'm not allowed to and then
that's where we actually that's where
that behavior drives towards the thing
that is destructive for us yeah we push
the we push that desire or that uh that
impulse down and then of course it's
going to Rebel yeah it's going to start
to squeak out in other ways exactly
that's okay well if I if I couldn't have
my pleasure there then later at night
when I'm like going to bed or something
and I'm tired and my dopamine is a
little low then I'll be attracted to
porn or something right exactly that's
just another way of not getting what I
want not feeling the pleasure like right
I think that it's a good thing just to
say that that how many people really
scared of pleasure for that reason it's
like I'm not allowed to you know the
interesting thing is all you have to do
as a kid is feel good and
be punished for pleasure to start being
really scary something about the human
system what I've noticed is getting
punished when you don't feel good is
just easier on the system than getting
punished when you feel really
good like having something really good
taken from us is harder than right so if
a kid feel feels bad about what they've
done and you're like yeah that was bad
it's useless granted it's like it
doesn't help because then you're like
they're already listening to how bad
they feel but somehow or another they're
like ah yeah but we can all think back
to our childhood at least most of us can
think back to our childhood I'm like but
I was good I was doing the right thing
and I got
punished and it's like there's a there's
like a there's a sting to that that's
different there's like a oh what the
[__] and and and I and I think that
that's probably also part of the reason
that we're so scared of pleasure because
the taking away of it is is so hard on
our system it somehow stings more than
than than getting punished for other
stuff neuroscientifically we we
experience the loss of something twice
as much as we experience the like a gain
uh I'm not sure if that's quite the
relevant piece here but just the fact
that we experience a loss so deeply that
like loss of pleasure can be a really
big hit yeah and especially because
pleasure is so high and a loss is so the
other side of it like that contrast
sticks in our minds yeah but then this
interesting thing happens is as you
start doing a a pleasure practice you're
like oh it's available all the time like
you can take it away from me for a
couple minutes if you want like you know
what I mean like it can be taken away
for a couple minutes but there it is
again I can have it and then and so
there's something you know not logical
about it but there is something very
human about it and I think that's also
probably part of the reason that you
asked earlier what makes it that um we
stop doing
pleasure it's because it hurts so much
when we lost it and then I'm reminded of
your story with with your daughter Esme
where you know she was uh she and her
boyfriend at the end of high school were
breaking up and they knew they were
going to go in different locations and
different colleges and whatever and
she's just in this heartbreak and she's
like wow I just never knew it could feel
so good so there is you know coming back
to that that definition without positive
or negative veilance of just the
awareness and the noticing of the
sensation moving in the body that even
those experiences we have when pleasure
is taken away can themselves be deeply
pleasurable in a different way when we
relax our constraints or beliefs on what
pleasure is supposed to be yeah you
can't do it as a kid but you can
definitely see that as an adult as a kid
it's just devastation but yeah exactly
so I want to I want to leave listeners
with any any kind of tips or tools or an
experiment that they could run in their
lives we have a a guided audio for how
to just like experience pleasure just
sitting around and um and so you can get
that at view. lifee experiments and so
that's that's the easiest way to do it
and that'll kind of you can walk walk
through it three or four times and then
after that you can use it anywhere
anytime without the without actually
having to listen to it because you get
it you get this the system really
quickly of how to take pleasure in just
the most simple
things um but it's good to have that
audio Guidance the first couple times
because what usually happens is people
go oh that feels really good okay now
I'm off
Tu so it's good just to have like some
other pleasure that I'm actually pushing
away yeah EX exactly now I'm off to
produce some pleasure that I'm actually
pushing away that's what lovely yeah um
so it's just good to have somebody you
know have the audio to hold you in it
for a while um yeah it was uh somebody
in Master Class asked for it so we
produced it for them and um and just
something we can make available to
everybody thank you Joe you're welcome
thank you Brett yeah thank you everybody
for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you want to hear more
about how to welcome more pleasure into
your life life uh you can go check out
that that experiment view. life/
experiments and you can also join our
newsletter or you can check out our
courses at artof
accomplishment. if you enjoyed what you
heard today please share it with a
friend and remember to follow us and
rate US in your podcast app the art of
accomplishment was produced and hosted
by myself Brett kler and Joe Hudson mon
Kelly is our production coordinator and
this episode was edited by on replay